Updated README (#100)
informalsystems/atomkraft: README.md

# Atomkraft: E2E testing for Cosmos blockchains

Below we describe what Atomkraft is about, and explain the concepts behind the tool. In case you would like to skip that, and jump directly into action, please read our [Installation guide](./INSTALLATION.md) to install the tool; afterwards it's worth following either our [Cosmos SDK Token Transfer tutorial](examples/cosmos-sdk/transfer/transfer.md), or [CosmWasm tutorial](examples/cosmwasm/counter/README.md).

> - [Introduction](#introduction)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We cover the following topics in this file:

- [Introduction](#introduction)
```

Atomkraft is likely to benefit you as a _Cosmos SDK developer_ if:

- the new functionality you've implemented interacts in non-trivial ways with other important modules (e.g. with [bank](https://docs.cosmos.network/master/modules/bank/), [staking](https://docs.cosmos.network/master/modules/staking/), [authz](https://docs.cosmos.network/master/modules/authz/), etc.), and you are unsure whether some important invariants of those modules are preserved;
- you want to grow and maintain a regression test suite for the blockchain modules you are developing, to make sure of their correctness as your blockchain evolves;
- you want to automate quality assurance for your blockchain modules, and integrate fast E2E testing solution that's executed on every PR.

**Key Atomkraft features** that allow to address the above concerns:

- Push-button, but fully customizable, automation of local testnet creation
- Clean, fully customizable trajectory from test case generation to its execution on the local testnet

> - Automatic generation of massive test suites from compact TLA+ models possible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support for automatic generation of massive test suites from compact TLA+ models
```

> - Easy execution of test cases generated via other means (e.g. manual, BDD, PBT) possible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Easy execution of test cases generated via other means (e.g. manual, BDD, PBT)
```

- Anytime ready-to-integrate regression test suite in the form of a standard Pytest project
- Ready-to-execute standard test suites for important Cosmos SDK modules (coming soon!)
- Generation of reports and dashboards for presentation and analysis of testing results (coming soon!)

## Conceptual overview

In itself, Atomkraft is nothing more than a command-line application, which is as easy to obtain for your system as executing `pip install atomkraft`; please consult the detailed [Installation Instructions](INSTALLATION.md) if needed. At the top-level, Atomkraft provides you the commands illustrated in the diagram below.

![Atomkraft users](docs/images/atomkraft-users.svg)

### Atomkraft project

> Every work with Atomkraft happens in the scope of an _Atomkraft project_; you create an Atomkraft project via `atomkraft init` command. The command will initialize a new project in a given directory, and install all necessary software for it; all fully automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Working with Atomkraft takes place in the scope of an _Atomkraft project_, which is initialized via `atomkraft init` command. The command will setup a new project in a given directory and install all necessary software for it, all fully automatically.
```

> The good news is that an Atomkraft project is simultaneously a [Pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/) project! At any point in time you can execute `pytest` inside your Atomkraft project, and this command will rerun all tests you've created or executed with Atomkraft in the scope of this project. So, when you've executed `atomkraft init`, you've also started to create your regression test suite; congratulations!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The good news is that an Atomkraft project is simultaneously a [Pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/) project! At any point in time you can execute `pytest` inside your Atomkraft project, and this command will rerun all tests you've created in the scope of this project. So, when you've executed `atomkraft init`, you've also started to create your regression test suite; congratulations!
```

> More than that, an Atomkraft project is also a [Python Poetry](https://python-poetry.org) project: you can treat is just as a normal Python project, and add your custom Python tests there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More than that, an Atomkraft project is also a [Python Poetry](https://python-poetry.org) project: you can treat it just as a normal Python project, and add your custom Python tests there.
```

At the top level, an Atomkraft project contains the following:

- Folders that hold the corresponding artifacts:
  - `models` is meant to keep your TLA+ models, if you are willing to generate test cases from formal models;

>   - `traces` contain abstract test cases, represented in the form of [ITF traces](https://apalache.informal.systems/docs/adr/015adr-trace.html) (ITF stands for _Informal Trace Format_, a JSON encoding of a sequence of test case steps);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `traces` contain abstract test cases, represented in the form of [ITF traces](https://apalache.informal.systems/docs/adr/015adr-trace.html) (a JSON encoding of a sequence of test case steps);
```

- Abstract traces can be generated by whatever means: from model checkers such as [Apalache](https://apalache.informal.systems), via fuzzing, PBT, BDD, or even manually. How the abstract trace is produced, doesn't matter; it still can be executed using Atomkraft's infrastructure.
- It is much easier to understand the intent of a test case expressed as an abstract trace, because of absence of excessive details.
- Abstract traces are lightweight in terms of storage, which allows us to generate and maintain thousands of them, covering many corner cases, at no extra cost.

We have automated the process of writing a reactor via `atomkraft reactor` command. A user needs only to supply the lists of actions, and of state variables, and the command will generate a reactor stub with a function for each action; what remains is only to fill the body of each such function.

### Generating traces from TLA+ models

> As explained above, abstract traces can be obtained by whatever means; we do not constrain the user in this respect. The most time efficient method, from our point of view, is to generate traces from formal models expressed in [TLA+](https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tla.html), the specification language designed by Leslie Lamport. For a gentle introduction to TLA+ you may use the Informal's [TLA+ Language Reference Manual](https://apalache.informal.systems/docs/lang/index.html) [TLA+ Basics Tutorial](https://mbt.informal.systems/docs/tla_basics_tutorials/). While TLA+ may look scary for beginners, we can assure you that learning it will greatly improve your productivity when reasoning about (and testing!) both protocols and code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As explained above, abstract traces can be obtained by whatever means; we do not constrain the user in this respect. The most time efficient method, from our point of view, is to generate traces from formal models expressed in [TLA+](https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tla.html), the specification language designed by Leslie Lamport. For a gentle introduction to TLA+ you may use the Informal's [TLA+ Language Reference Manual](https://apalache.informal.systems/docs/lang/index.html) and [TLA+ Basics Tutorial](https://mbt.informal.systems/docs/tla_basics_tutorials/). While TLA+ may look scary for beginners, we can assure you that learning it will greatly improve your productivity when reasoning about (and testing!) both protocols and code.
```

4. generated abstract traces from a TLA+ model using `atomkraft model sample`, or created abstract traces by some other means

Then you are ready to go, and execute your tests! We provide two commands for doing that:

- `atomkraft test trace` will accept an abstract trace and a reactor, spin the local testnet, and execute the trace against the testnet
- `atomkraft test model` is a convenience shorthand that combines step 4 above (`atomkraft model sample`) with `atomkraft test trace`, and allows you to execute tests directly from a TLA+ model, sidestepping explicit trace generation.

Both of the above `atomkraft test` commands populate the `tests` directory of your project with Pytest-based tests; so executing `pytest` inside your Atomkraft project at any point in time will reproduce all of your tests. In fact, the complete Atomkraft project directory is ready at any point in time to be exported, and used as a Pytest project, for example for reproducing your tests in the CI.

## What's next

Atomkraft's functionality outlined above represents the tool MVP: please feel free to employ it in your projects, and let us know of your experience: we are always ready to assist!

> There is many more features that are planned or are already being implemented; so stay tuned. Below is the preview of the future Atomkraft functionality:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many more features that are planned or are already being implemented; so stay tuned. Below is the preview of the future Atomkraft functionality:
```
